- Hi it's me, Tim Dodd,
the Everyday Astronaut.
SpaceX's Falcon 9 rocket, the
world's first reusable rocket.
(record scratching)
Wait!
No it's not.
Do you remember the Space Shuttle?
It had those Solid Rocket
Boosters, and the Orbiter,
which were both reusable weren't they?
Well today we're going to talk about
why the Space Shuttle failed
to actually be reusable
and wound up being described
with a more accurate word, refurbishable.
People often cite the
shortcomings of the Space Shuttle
and are quick to point it
to SpaceX's claims of the
Falcon 9 booster being reusable.
So today we're going to
look at what it takes
to get the Space Shuttle
operational between flights,
what it takes to get a Falcon
9 operational between flights,
and why SpaceX's first stage booster
take much less of a beating
than the Space Shuttle did.
We'll also do a quick reminder
of what technologies SpaceX
added to their Block 5 booster
to hopefully achieve their goal
of making a rapidly reusable rocket
that can truly be reused 10 times
before needing any kind
of serious refurbishment.
Let's get started!
- [Technician] Three, two, one, zero,
and lift off.
- [Neil] That's one small step for man.
(upbeat, rhythmic music)
- Reusable is definitely
the hottest buzz word
in the new space industry.
If you don't know why a
vehicle being reusable
is such a massive game changer,
may I suggest checking out my video
Why does Falcon Heavy matter
to help get a good perspective
on why reusability matters.
But long story short,
the margins to get stuff
to space are so thin
it takes a massive rocket
to put anything substantial up there.
So unfortunately there's just
too little margins left over
to add additional hardware
to make a rocket reusable.
This makes spaceflight
extremely, extremely expensive.
As in, so expensive we're
hoping to someday see
costs come down to just
a $1000 per kilogram!
Yeah, imagine those shipping
costs down here on Earth.
Hi there, I'm calling to get a quote
for some new tires for
my 2011 Hyundai Elantra.
Yes of course it's the GT model.
I did some really cool drifting
and so that's why the tires are bad.
How much would the new tires be?
Oh $400?
How much for shipping?
$36000!
And that would actually be a steal
compared to the historically
astronomical prices
of getting space hardware into space.
Even the cheapest dollar to kilogram ratio
is around the $3000 per kilogram mark,
thanks to the Falcon 9 and Falcon Heavy.
It's a good thing rocket
delivery isn't the standard
here on Earth.
So here's where reusability comes in.
It's honestly fundamental.
Of course!
Why throw away super expensive
multi-million dollar engines
and a massive fuselage
and all that extra stuff
when you could just reuse it, right?
I mean duh!
Well that was the original
idea for the Space Shuttle.
Believe it or not,
NASA was seeking a reusable launch vehicle
before we even put humans on the moon.
The original studies began in 1968,
some 10 months before Neil Armstrong
famously took the first steps on the moon.
As a matter of fact,
one of the first people to fly
the Space Shuttle, John Young
was walking on the moon when
he got news of the shuttle.
- [Tony] This looks like a good time
for some good news here.
The House passed the space
budget yesterday, 277 to 60,
which includes the votes for the shuttle.
(beeping)
- [Charlie] That's wonderful, wonderful.
Tony, again I'll say it.
With that salute I'm
proud to be an American.
I'll tell you, what a
program and what a place
and what an experience.
- [John] Yeah, and I'll
say it too. (beeping)
- [Tony] So am I.
Country needs that shuttle mighty bad.
- So with all the excitement
leading up to the shuttle,
fast forward 50 years to today
and the Space Shuttle has kind
of a bad taste in our mouths.
It wound up being terribly
expensive, pretty dangerous,
and actually more expensive
than just about any other
way to get into space,
although it could do things
that no other launch vehicle could do.
So with some of the greatest
minds working on the shuttle,
why did it fail its promise
of bringing the cost down?
Is SpaceX doomed to repeat history
or has a lot changed in 50 years?
So first, let's look at the
recovery methods of each system.
They're quite different.
The Space Shuttle utilized
both parachutes and a lifting
body to recover hardware.
Let's go in order of what was recovered,
so starting with the Solid Rocket Boosters
which were jettisoned around
two minutes into flight.
The boosters separate
while traveling around
4800 kilometers an hour
or 3000 miles an hour,
at an altitude of around
45 kilometers or 30 miles.
And due to their velocity,
they continue to coast
upward to their highest point
of around 65 kilometers or 40 miles.
Just a fun note,
that does means the SRBs
never actually make it
above the Karman line
or the commonly agreed
upon boundary of space.
So keep that in mind.
The boosters fall back
through the atmosphere
and start popping a sequence of parachutes
at exactly 4786 meters or 15704 feet.
Eventually after a pilot
chute, and a drogue chute,
the three main parachutes deploy
and splish splash the booster
down relatively softly in the ocean.
The Orbiter on the other hand
is traveling much, much faster
and its recovery, like all
orbital things, is a lot hotter.
About one hour before touchdown,
the Orbiter turns around
and faces away from its
direction of travel or prograde.
It fires up its orbital
maneuvering system or OMS
and slows down 1%.
Yep, that's it, only about 1%!
And that's enough to lower its orbit
from about 480 kilometers or 300 miles
down to just 45 kilometers or
28 miles at its lowest point.
That's crazy.
The Orbiter then turns back around
so it can reenter at
about a 40 degree angle.
Now it's time for the
atmosphere to do its work.
The Orbiter is absolutely
cruising at this point.
It's still traveling around
27000 kilometers an hour
or 17000 miles an hour,
the Orbiter begins to hit air molecules
and starts to build up a ton of friction
and therefore a ton of heat.
The Orbiter will reach temperatures
of 1650 degrees Celsius or
3000 degrees Fahrenheit!
Ouch!
But luckily, the Orbiter is covered
with four different types
of thermal protection.
It has reinforced carbon-carbon
on the leading edges,
then there were between
24177 and 31088 tiles,
depending on the Orbiter,
on the underside and front of the vehicle,
then there is white Nomex blankets
on the upper payload bay doors,
the upper wing and fuselage,
and a few white surface tiles
for low temperature areas as well.
For 12 minutes, the shuttle
had so much hot ionized gases
surrounding the vehicle, it
caused a full radio blackout.
Eventually, after several
minutes of atmospheric drag
and some computer guided S-turns,
the shuttle bleeds off
a lot of its velocity.
Once it's about 40 kilometers
or 25 miles downrange,
the commander drops the
nose to minus 20 degrees,
that's almost seven times steeper
than a commercial airliner,
and it's still traveling 20 times faster.
Finally the shuttle lands
like a traditional jetliner,
only a little quicker,
touching down at 350 kilometers
an hour or 220 miles an hour
on a 4.5 kilometer or
2.8 mile long runway.
That runway's actually so long
that there's over a one and a half meter
or over 5 feet in
relative height difference
between the ends of the runway
due to the curve of the Earth!
That's crazy.
(whistles)
It's quite the journey!
Welcome home, Space Shuttle.
So now, let's do a quick rundown
on how a Falcon 9 is recovered.
I've covered this topic a
few times, more in depth,
so if you have any questions remaining,
check out my video How
SpaceX lands the Falcon 9.
At around two minutes and
40 seconds into flight,
the Falcon 9 shuts down its main engines,
called MECO or main engine cut off.
It coasts for a moment
and then the first stage
lets go of the second stage
for stage separation.
At this point the Falcon 9 is traveling
up to 8000 kilometers an hour
or almost 5000 miles an hour
at an altitude of 65
kilometers or 40 miles.
Quick note, that's about twice as fast
as the Space Shuttle's rocket boosters.
The first stage quickly
performs a flip maneuver
with its nitrogen thrusters,
to point its engines prograde.
Then, depending on the mission,
the booster may ignite
three of its nine engines
and do a boost back burn if
it's going to land back at land.
But there might not be
enough margins left over
to do the boost back burn.
In that case it's omitted and the Falcon 9
continues on its ballistic trajectory
away from the launch pad and
heads towards the drone ship
that's been precisely placed
based on each mission profile.
But in either case,
the booster will coast
up to its highest point,
typically over the Karman line
or 100 kilometers or 62 miles.
In other words,
the booster gets to hang out
in space for a minute or so!
Lucky, I wanna go.
Around 55 kilometers or
34 miles in altitude,
the Falcon 9 will light up
three of its nine Merlin engines
as it reenters the atmosphere.
It does this to slow itself down
and it actually creates a
literal force field around itself
so it can survive reentry.
After around 20 seconds of reentry burn,
the booster scrubs off 30
to 40% of its velocity,
which is enough to
withstand the remaining heat
as the atmosphere gets
thicker and thicker.
The atmosphere will then take off
another 60 to 70% of
the remaining velocity
until the booster is only traveling
about 1000 kilometers an
hour or 620 miles an hour.
Then it lights up one or
three of its Merlin engines
to perform the final landing burn
which it needs to time perfectly.
Even with just one of
the nine engines running
at its minimum throttle,
the booster still has
too much thrust to hover.
So if the vehicle stops
before it hits the ground,
it'll actually start going back up.
Yeah, that's not good.
This needs to be perfectly timed
in a maneuver called the
hover-slam or suicide burn.
Then the landing legs deploy
and the Falcon 9 softly touches down.
Well, hopefully.
(explosive booming)
So before we move on, let's
really quick remind you
why the Falcon 9 doesn't use parachutes
like the Space Shuttle SRBs did.
Well there's a few reasons,
and I'm just gonna breeze through these,
since I've done many videos about this
and I probably still need to do
a more dedicated and
updated video about it.
So here's Everyday
Astronaut's top seven reasons
why SpaceX doesn't use
parachutes to land the Falcon 9!
One: SpaceX tried to use parachutes
on the first two Falcon 9
missions to recover the booster.
Unfortunately,
the booster is going about
twice as fast as the SRBs
and the parachutes couldn't
survive the extra forces.
Two: The rocket already has
engines capable of slowing down,
why not use them?
Does a helicopter need
a parachute to land?
No it has an engine and
a propeller already!
Three: You can't land a large rocket
on Mars or the moon with a parachute,
the atmosphere is too thin or nonexistent.
So you'd better start practicing
propulsive landings now
and get good at 'em!
Four: The rocket needs to slow down
before it hits the atmosphere
to survive reentry anyway.
Remember that whole reentry burn thing?
Yeah, a parachute can't work very well
before it's in the atmosphere,
so rocket engines are the only way to go.
Five: Parachutes and the supporting system
that would allow the fuselage
to get stretched and not just compressed
would just add otherwise dead weight.
Six: Parachutes, although steerable,
are not nearly as precise as grid fins,
cold gas thrusters and an engine gimbal.
SpaceX is finding this out the hard way
as they tried to catch their fairings
under steerable parafoils.
Seven: Splashing down is bad mkay.
Salt water and precise
liquid rocket engine
don't mix very well.
So that's actually a
great place to transition.
Okay, so now that we recovered
the reusable parts of the Space Shuttle
and the first stage of the Falcon 9,
what did they do to
prepare them for reflight?
Let's start with the Space Shuttle.
What did it take to get
one back to the launch pad?
After splashdown, the
boosters were sealed up
by scuba divers with a giant plug
where they drained the water
so it could be towed back
to Kennedy Space Center.
Each booster required a crew
of 18 for ocean recovery.
The Space Shuttle
obviously had two boosters,
so that's 36 people on booster recovery.
Then the boosters are disassembled
and sent out to Promontory, Utah
to be cleaned, paint stripped, repainted,
inspected and reloaded
with solid propellant.
Then they go back to Kennedy Space Center
for assembly at the United
Space Alliance Assembly
and Refurbishment Facility.
I like the name of that place.
The four segments in each booster
are then mated to a new igniter,
forward segment, nose cap, aft skirt
and frustum, whatever that is.
So basically just the casing
was actually truly reused.
I definitely think refurbished
is the right word here
considering they stripped it down
to the bare metal each time
and taken to a place called
the Refurbishment Facility.
Okay, so the boosters aren't
at all what I'd call reusable,
but how about the Orbiter?
What's it take to actually
get that thing reflying?
After touching down,
a highly trained crew of 150 people
and 25 specially designed vehicles
head out to intercept the vehicle.
They do safety checks for
explosives and toxic gases,
helped the crew exit the Orbiter
and eventually they tow it
to the Orbiter Processing Facility.
Once inside the 2700 square meter
or 29000 square foot hangar,
the shuttle would be processed
for approximately 125 days.
More than 115 multi-level platforms
would surround the vehicle
so engineers could
check six million parts.
Six million parts!
What?
But first technicians
would don hazmat suits
to clean the vehicle
of any remaining toxic
and hypergolic elements.
Then they would remove the
Orbital Maneuvering System pods
and the Forward Reaction
Control Systems modules
to be repaired and retested.
Then crews would take off
all three of the Space Shuttle's
main engines, or RS-25's.
These babies are still incredible engines,
some of the most efficient
engines ever made.
But they required a healthy
amount of inspection
and refurbishment between each flight.
Each engine had 50000 parts
and about 7000 of which were life-limited
and occasionally had to be replaced.
In 2002, Kennedy Space Center
took over assembly tasks of the engines
instead of sending them
out for refurbishment.
But perhaps the biggest
and most daunting task
of the Space Shuttle
was inspecting the thousands and thousands
of fragile silica tiles on
the bottom of the Orbiter.
There were between 24177 and 31088 tiles,
depending on the Orbiter.
Every single one was unique
and had to be carefully inspected
and if damaged, replaced.
And of course, all the
avionics, the payload bay,
the hydraulic control
surfaces et cetera, et cetera,
were carefully checked out
between each flight as well.
In total, the Space Shuttle required
no less than 650000 hours of
labor between each flight.
Say the average person made $25 an hour,
which I'm sure is kind of conservative
for a highly trained technician,
the cost of human labor
to get a Space Shuttle ready for launch
would be around 16 million dollars!
And again, that's being
fairly conservative.
But it wasn't always this way.
Actually, before the
Challenger accident in 1986,
the shuttle went through much
less refurbishment and checks.
So few in fact, it may have seen as little
as almost 1% the amount of
labor hours between flights.
But after the Challenger accident,
NASA changed the entire process
of getting the Space Shuttle flight ready
and wound up going over every single inch
with a fine tooth comb.
That's probably a good thing
when you're dealing with human life.
Oh and lastly, after 1989,
to get the shuttle ready
it was placed on top of the
Orbiter Transfer System,
a 76 wheel transporter,
to take it from the OPF
to the Vehicle Assembly building
to be mated with the external tank
and the Solid Rocket Boosters.
Fun fact, SpaceX now owns
the Orbiter Transfer System
to transport their boosters!
Okay, now time for the big question.
What does it take to
get a Falcon 9 booster
back to the launch pad?
Let me start off by saying
a lot of this is speculation
since SpaceX doesn't make public
exactly what goes into preparation,
but let's give a rundown
on what they have done,
and what things they will be doing.
So first off, if it
landed on the drone ship,
a little robot actually comes out
and grabs onto the
booster and hangs on to it
so this doesn't happen.
It's then transported back
by a support crew of
around 10 and two ships.
But if the booster lands on land,
the booster is picked up by a crane
and put onto their transporter.
For the first few years
of the Falcon 9 reuse,
the booster were shipped back to Hawthorne
for the refurbishment.
But SpaceX is building a
booster refurbishment facility
at the cape.
The first booster to ever land
on December 21, 2015 for the OG2 mission,
was extensively torn down and inspected.
Since this was the first booster
that SpaceX actually caught in one piece
they had to check their work
and see if it actually came out okay.
On the first 13 reused boosters,
or non-Block 5 boosters,
we know SpaceX changed out
the heat shields and blankets
behind the exhaust nozzles.
We know they had to fix
and repair the grid fins
on the extra hot missions.
We know they had to do a lot
of inspections on the vehicle
but they also had to run
an X-ray along the booster
to ensure the fuselage
is still good to go.
Now I've heard speculations
of between 1000 to 10000
human hours of labor
for the turnaround of the
Block 3 and Block 4 boosters.
And say this is terribly conservative.
Say it's actually 100000 hours of labor,
that'd still be over six times less labor
than the Space Shuttle Orbiter.
The Falcon 9 has much
less systems to check over
than the Orbiter, so I think
it's pretty safe to assume
there's a lot less labor hours required
to prepare it for reflight.
We know SpaceX has a goal with
their new Block 5 Falcon 9
to see it land and refly
within 24 to 48 hours
with nothing but inspections
and checks between flights.
The overall goal of
their new block 5 booster
is to be reflown 10 times
without any actual
refurbishment, only inspections.
They built Block 5 having
learned the lessons
from the 24 recoveries
leading up to Block 5.
If you need a reminder of
what's new with Block 5,
I have a video all about
what Block 5 is and what has changed.
A quick list of things that
are new with the Block 5
is a thermal protective
coating on the whole booster,
a liquid cooled heat
shield by the engines,
a bolted Octaweb, 8% increase
in thrust on the first stage,
upgraded retractable landing
legs, titanium grid fins,
an upgraded COPV 2.0 and a ton of tweaks
that allow it to be even more reusable
and most importantly,
rated for human flight.
So how can the Falcon 9
booster actually be reflown
without refurbishment?
Can it?
What's so different about the Falcon 9
compared to the Space Shuttle?
Well let's first compare it to the SRBs
and see what it actually does differently.
First off, the SRBs
splashed down in salt water.
That's not really a good thing.
Solid Rocket Boosters
are also basically giant empty canisters
that are loaded up with a
rubber like solid propellant
between each flight.
This is different than a
liquid fueled rocket engine
that has say tens of thousands of parts.
If a liquid engine were to
be submerged in salt water,
I don't think that'd be a good thing.
So right there is probably
the biggest thing,
having a booster land on
dry land or a dry ship deck,
is a huge leg up
as far as reusability
and refurbishment goes.
As a matter of fact,
the SRBs were so expensive to refurbish,
in the long run, it was more
expensive to bring them back,
tear them down and all that,
than it was just to build new ones.
So why is the Falcon 9 booster
more reusable than the Orbiter?
Well first off, the Orbiter
was not only a rocket,
it was also a spaceship that
carried up to seven people.
So a lot of work and check
outs went into the cockpit,
the interior, the payload
bay et cetera, et cetera,
let alone the actual rocket
engine portion of the Orbiter.
The RS-25 engine, although amazing
and eventually refurbished on-site,
still required an awful
lot of work to fly again.
The Merlin 1D engine
that SpaceX has developed
has been fired over 5600 times,
and is designed to be reflown
and reused over and over
with minimal inspections.
How much, we don't really know yet,
but more on that in a second.
But perhaps the biggest difference
between the Falcon 9 booster
and the Space Shuttle Orbiter
is the velocity in
which each one reenters.
Let's compare the velocities of the SRB,
the Falcon 9 first stage and the Orbiter
to help understand
why each one uses their
given reentry system.
The SRB never exceeds
4800 kilometers an hour
and it also stays lower in the atmosphere
so it doesn't require
any kind of slow down
before it reenters,
well because it never really
exited in the first place.
The Falcon 9 on the other hand
goes from up to about
8000 kilometers an hour
down to as low as about
5000 kilometers an hour
in order to survive reentry
using its retropropulsion.
But it's safe to say it
will probably never see
much more than 8000 kilometers an hour.
The Orbiter reenters
at speeds of up to
27000 kilometers an hour
but it slowly bleeds
off a lot of its speed
in the upper atmosphere.
Wow.
Those are some pretty big
differences in velocity.
Since the Falcon 9 booster
reenters at only 8000 kilometers an hour
it experiences up to
almost 40 times less heat
compared to the Orbiter.
What?
How can that be?
Well, since the first
stage of the Falcon 9
only gets up to at most about
a third of orbital velocity,
it receives much less than just
1/3rd of the amount of heat.
The compressed gas on the
leading edge of any vehicle
will see heat increase by velocity squared
but the thermal energy
transferred to the rocket
goes as velocity cubed!
So that means if a vehicle is
traveling four times faster,
the bow wave in front
can get 64 times hotter!
'Cause that's four times
faster, times four, so squared,
times another four, cubed, so 64!
Now this is an oversimplification
but that's why the Space Shuttle
needed those carbon-carbon leading edges
and those silica tiles
all over the bottom of it
to survive reentry.
Not only that, but the Falcon 9
also does an a pretty
significant retropropulsion burn
before it reenters, to ensure
the vehicle can survive.
The Space Shuttle didn't do any of this
because it relied on
its large surface area
to slowly bleed the speed
off for several minutes.
As a matter of fact,
the Space Shuttle spent almost
10 times the amount of time
radiating heat off through reentry,
which is the key to how its
non-ablative heat shield worked.
So long story short.
The first stage is going slow
enough to not get crazy hot,
so it doesn't require nearly
as much thermal protection.
Therefore it's probably safe to say
it doesn't require as much
refurbishment, hopefully.
(upbeat, melodic music)
So some final thoughts on all this.
First off, the reason
why I think the Falcon 9
will actually achieve reusability
when the Space Shuttle couldn't
is mostly due to the engineering
philosophy of SpaceX.
They are constantly tweaking their rocket,
to the point where
according to SpaceX's VP of
production, Andy Lambert,
SpaceX has "Never built any
two vehicles identically,
"such is the pace of
innovation at SpaceX."
Now this is quite different
from the Space Shuttle
that had only only five
operational vehicles
that changed very little in
their 30 years of operation.
As a matter of fact, phase
one of the Space Shuttle
was only the first four
flights of Columbia.
After that, further
development would be minimal.
But with the Falcon 9, if
an idea doesn't work out,
they can literally make that change
on one of the next manufactured boosters.
And if it's a really big change,
they'll do that on the
next block iteration.
The Space Shuttle's design
didn't exactly freeze,
but it certainly didn't evolve
nearly as much in 30 years
as the Falcon 9 has in eight years.
Some might consider this
much change reckless,
but considering the end goal
is to actually have a reusable vehicle,
I'm really glad they're
pushing this aggressively.
I just can't wait another 30 years.
And lastly to those that think SpaceX
won't be able to make it
worth the cost of reflying,
or who question whether or not
it'll be worth it for them,
luckily for us, it really doesn't matter.
SpaceX is a private company.
They will only do what makes
the most financial sense.
So if after a few years
they look back and realize
it's more expensive to
try to refly these things
than it is to make a new one,
I'm sure they'll stop doing so,
because they don't wanna lose money.
They don't owe it to anyone
to reuse their rockets.
It's only in their best interest
to figure out how to do so
so they can maximize profits.
And that's just different
than the Space Shuttle
which had the weight of the
entire nation's expectations
to be reusable.
Whether or not the system put
in place actually made sense,
it was too late.
There was no room for
major changes per say
since Congress would probably frown upon,
"Well this didn't work out,
let's scrap the entire idea."
So personally,
I think with this new age
of innovation and materials,
rapid evolution of hardware and software,
and leadership that simply
requires they keep trying
until they figure it out,
I think we're finally entering a new era
of reusable and airliner like rockets.
Hopefully!
So what are your thoughts?
Is actual reusability finally upon us
or do you think we're
still going to be stuck
in refurbishment land?
What other questions do you have?
Let me know your thoughts,
questions, and video requests
in the comments below!
Thanks to Lukas from kNews
for his amazing animations.
I've always been a fan of his work
and was so happy to work with
him on some of these visuals.
Be sure and check out his awesome channel
where he does updates on spaceflight news
and other great
spaceflight topics as well.
Check it out, kNews!
And of course I owe a huge
thanks to my Patreon supporters
for helping me make this
and all other Everyday
Astronaut content possible.
You guys are seriously amazing!
And you help me stay sane
during all these long bouts of research.
They hang out in my exclusive discord
and our exclusive subreddit,
to help me script and research.
If you wanna help contribute,
please visit patreon dot
com slash everydayastronaut.
Thank you, seriously thank you.
As always, all the music
in my videos is original.
Feel free to check it out for free
at soundcloud dot com
slash everydayastronaut.
Tell a friend.
Hey guess what?
This ridiculous shirt is finally
available in my web store,
along with a lot of other
fun things like hats, mugs,
prints of rocket launches
or original other work
and lots of other fun stuff
at everydayastronaut dot com slash shop.
Have fun.
Thanks everybody, that does it for me.
I'm Tim Dodd, the Everyday Astronaut,
bringing space down to
Earth for everyday people.